@page cmfRecommendedSoftwareEnvironment Recommended Software Environment

There are as many Python editors and interactive systems as hydrological
models. Since cmf is nothing more than an extension to Python, you can
just use what you like. However, if you are new to Python, you can start
with the software tools used by the cmf developers:

## Interactive use

### IPython

<http://ipython.org/> - Works just great together with matplotlib for
plotting results of cmf. Provides fantastic helper functions and code
completion with the tab key.

### Spyder

<http://packages.python.org/spyder/> - Integrates IPython into a bigger
environment which is by coincidence quite similar to some proprietary
software for scientific modelling.

Both programs are integrated for Windows in scientific Python
distributions, like [WinPython](http://code.google.com/p/winpython/),
[python(x,y)](https://code.google.com/p/pythonxy/) and
[Anaconda](https://www.continuum.io/downloads). WinPython is smaller
and available for 32bit and 64bit, while python(x,y) has more modules
and non-python tools integrated, but it is only available for 32bit
Python. I recommend the usage of a scientific Python distribution on
Windows.

## Editors

### Eclipse with PyDev

<http://eclipse.org> and <http://pydev.org> - The Diva among the Python
Editors (personal opinion). Takes years to start, fails sometimes
completely, but if it is there it is simply the **best** - with code
completion like in Visual Studio. Since it is eclipse based, everything
can be done with the proper plugin. Not the nicest for installation.

### PyCharm

<https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/> - The only software for money on
this website but it is really good. Academics, like students and
teachers get a free licence.

### Notepad++

<http://notepad-plus-plus.org/> - Great, light, fast editor for Windows,
offers code highlighting for many languages.

### gedit, kate, emacs, vim

If you are familiar Linux, I'm sure you have already your favourite
light editor with syntax highlighting, otherwise use what comes with
your distribution.


